initial guide steps (draft) (#5264)
dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/guides/mesh-qs.md

---
title: "Quickstart for dbt Mesh"
id: "mesh-qs"
level: 'Intermediate'
icon: 'guides'

> tags: ['dbt Cloud','Quickstart']

Reviewer: replaced intermediate w quickstart here since we have intermediate above. otherwise intermediate was showing up twice in the doc.

Author: sounds good!

<File name='models/core/agg_customer_payment_journey.sql'>

```sql

with stg_payments as (
    select * from {{ ref('stg_payments') }}
),

fct_orders as (
    select * from {{ ref('analytics', 'fct_orders', v=1) }}
),

final as (
    select 
        days_as_customer_at_purchase,
        -- we use the pivot macro in the dbt_utils package to create columns that total payments for each method
        {{ dbt_utils.pivot(
            'payment_method',
            dbt_utils.get_column_values(ref('stg_payments'), 'payment_method'),
            agg='sum',
            then_value='amount',
            prefix='total_',
            suffix='_amount'
        ) }}, 
        sum(amount) as total_amount
    from fct_orders
    left join stg_payments using (order_id)
    group by 1
)

select * from final

```

</File>

Then, commit & merge the change. Go to the “Deploy -> Jobs” page and click “Run Now” on the Finance Job. We’ll see that the the agg_customer_payment_journey model builds but surfaces a warning with the deprecation date.

<!-- <Lightbox src="/img/guides/dbt-mesh/deprecation_date_warning.png" title="Deprecation date warning" /> -->

> ## View lineage with dbt Explorer

Reviewer: i updated this header here to include the product name and action. i think otherwise someone might not make the connection that 'explore' in the cloud UI is that same as 'db explorer'. i think that was a bigger discussion in general but made that small tweak - hope that's ok!

> 

Reviewer: if you'd like, it might be mice to wrap the last bits in a confetti component for a nice little easter egg! we have one in the core to cloud guide ([see here and click anywhere on the page](https://docs.getdbt.com/guides/core-to-cloud-1?step=10)).

to do this, just wrap the content inside the `<ConfettiTrigger>..your content..</ConfettiTrigger>`  component!

Author: love it!

          {{ dbt_utils.datediff('first_order_date', 'order_date', 'day') }} as days_as_customer_at_purchase
      from orders o
      left join customers c using (customer_id)
      left join customer_orders co using (customer_id)
  )

  select * from final
  ```
  </File>

6. Execute `dbt build` command.

Before a downstream team can leverage assets from this foundational project, you need to first:
- [Create and define](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-access) at least one model as “public”
- Run a [deployment job](/docs/deploy/deploy-jobs) successfully
  - Note, Enable the **Generate docs on run** toggle for this job to update the dbt Explorer. Once run, you can link dbt Explorer to a deployment job on the **Project Settings** page (Refer to [artifacts](/docs/deploy/artifacts) for more information).

## Define a public model and run first job

In the previous section, you've arranged your basic building blocks, now let's integrate dbt Mesh. Although the Finance team requires the `fct_orders` model for analyzing payment trends, other models, particularly those in the staging layer used for data cleansing and joining, are not needed by downstream teams.

> To make `fct_orders` publicly available, add an `access: public` clause to the relevant YAML file. Add and save the following file to the project:

Reviewer: this means they have to create a 'models/core/core.yml' file in the Jaffle | Data Analytics project, right?

Author: yup! in line 211 I noted they'll add and save the 'models/core/core.yml' file

        description: ""

      - name: first_name
        data_type: varchar
        description: ""

      - name: last_name
        data_type: varchar
        description: ""

      - name: first_order_date
        data_type: date
        description: ""

      - name: days_as_customer_at_purchase
        data_type: number
        description: "Days between this purchase and customer's first purchase"

    # Declare the versions, and highlight the diffs
    versions:
    
      - v: 1
        deprecation_date: 2024-06-30 00:00:00.00+00:00
        columns:
          # This means: use the 'columns' list from above, but exclude is_return
          - include: all
            exclude: [is_return]
        
      - v: 2
        columns:
          # This means: use the 'columns' list from above, but exclude status
          - include: all
            exclude: [status]

```

</File>

Let’s verify how dbt compiles the ref statement now based on the version that we scope. Open a new file, add the following select statements, and click **Compile**.

```sql
select * from {{ ref('fct_orders', v=1) }}
select * from {{ ref('fct_orders', v=2) }}
select * from {{ ref('fct_orders') }}
```

> 

Reviewer: what should they see @adinsmoor?

Author: I'll add another sentence to clarify what they should see: "Note how each ref is compiled to the specified version (or the latest, when not specified)."

  - Use "Jaffle | Finance" for the other project
- Select your data platform, then **Next** to set up your connection.
- In the **Configure your environment** section, enter the **Settings** for your new project.
- Click **Test Connection**. This verifies that dbt Cloud can access your data platform account.
- Click **Next** if the test succeeded. If it failed, you might need to go back and double check your settings.
- For this guide, make sure you create a single [development](/docs/dbt-cloud-environments#create-a-development-environment) and [Deployment](/docs/deploy/deploy-environments) per project.
  - For "Jaffle | Data Analytics", set the default database to `jaffle_da`.
  - For "Jaffle | Finance", set the default database to `jaffle_finance`

<Lightbox src="/img/guides/dbt-mesh/create-new-project.gif" width="80%" title="Navigate to 'Account settings' and then click + 'New Project' to create new projects in dbt Cloud" /> 

Once configured, each project should have:
  - A data platform connection
  - New git repo
  - one or more [environments](/docs/deploy/deploy-environments) (such as development, deployment)

## Set up a foundational project

A foundation project is where 

> 

Reviewer: @adinsmoor can i confirm if this is right?

Author: I'll tweak this to upstream project

    select * from {{ ref('stg_payments') }}
),

fct_orders as (
    select * from {{ ref('analytics', 'fct_orders', v=1) }}
),

final as (
    select 
        days_as_customer_at_purchase,
        -- we use the pivot macro in the dbt_utils package to create columns that total payments for each method
        {{ dbt_utils.pivot(
            'payment_method',
            dbt_utils.get_column_values(ref('stg_payments'), 'payment_method'),
            agg='sum',
            then_value='amount',
            prefix='total_',
            suffix='_amount'
        ) }}, 
        sum(amount) as total_amount
    from fct_orders
    left join stg_payments using (order_id)
    group by 1
)

select * from final
```

</File>

3. In the dbt Cloud IDE, go to **Version control** to commit and merge the changes.
4. Go to the **Deploy** -> **Jobs** page and click **Run Now** to run the Finance job. The `agg_customer_payment_journey` model will build and display a deprecation date warning.

<Lightbox src="/img/guides/dbt-mesh/deprecation_date_warning.png" title="The model will display a deprecation date warning." />

## View lineage with dbt Explorer <Lifecycle status="enterprise"/>

> Use dbt Explorer to view the lineage across projects in dbt Cloud. Navigate to the **Explore** page for each of your projects &mdash; you should now view the [lineage seamlessly across projects](/docs/collaborate/explore-multiple-projects).

Reviewer: coul we have an image here?

---
title: "Quickstart with dbt Mesh"
id: "mesh-qs"
level: 'Intermediate'
icon: 'guides'
tags: ['dbt Cloud','Quickstart']
hide_table_of_contents: true
---

<div style={{maxWidth: '900px'}}>

## Introduction

dbt Mesh, available in [dbt Cloud Enterprise](https://www.getdbt.com/), is a framework that helps organizations scale their teams and data assets effectively. It promotes governance best practices and breaks large projects into manageable sections &mdash; for faster data development. 

> In this guide you’ll learn how to set up a multi-project design using foundational concepts of [dbt Mesh](https://www.getdbt.com/blog/what-is-data-mesh-the-definition-and-importance-of-data-mesh). In this guide, you’ll:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide will teach you how to set a multi-project design using foundational concepts of [dbt Mesh](https://www.getdbt.com/blog/what-is-data-mesh-the-definition-and-importance-of-data-mesh) and how to implement a data mesh in dbt Cloud:
```

- Set up a foundational project called “Jaffle | Data Analytics”
- Set up a downstream project called “Jaffle | Finance”
- Add model access, versions, and contracts
- Set up a dbt Cloud job that is triggered on completion of an upstream job
 

> This guide explains how to implement a data mesh in dbt Cloud. For more information on why data mesh is important, read this post: [What is data mesh? The definition and importance of data mesh](https://www.getdbt.com/blog/what-is-data-mesh-the-definition-and-importance-of-data-mesh).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on why data mesh is important, read this post: [What is data mesh? The definition and importance of data mesh](https://www.getdbt.com/blog/what-is-data-mesh-the-definition-and-importance-of-data-mesh).
```
